CHAPTER 1

There isn't one of us who hasn't touched clay ... a pot, a porcelain cup, a
plate. Each time we do, we are touching more many millennia of unbroken
tradition.

The clay-making tradition survives worldwide through the often overlooked
efforts of 'knowledge keepers'...  craftsmen, scholars, artists and collectors.
It was in Romania that I met some of them, individuals through whom ancient
skills, wisdom, and beliefs remain alive, vibrant and useful.  The knowledge
they are preserving stretches back to the beginnings of European civilization 8
to 9,000 year back in time.

CHAPTER 2 - A culture built on clay

In Romania I discovered the nation's very identity entrenched in clay. The
country is sometimes said to have a "clay and wood” culture. These two
materials have long been central to its history. Before the rise of the Greeks
or the Romans or even the Egyptian civilizations, the earliest Romanians were
making sophisticated pottery.

Shards of pots have been found at Neolithic sites more than 8,000 years old.
The later Cucuteni culture, which existed in an area overlapping northern
Romania and the Ukraine from about 4,800 BC to 3,000 BC, crafted practical and
ceremonial ceramics that still startle with their beauty. The Dacians, who
inhabited Romania around the time of Rome, created elegantly proportioned clay
vessels.

The traditions of Romanian pottery may be ancient, but they endure into the
present. The continuing connection between man and clay reveals itself in
countless ways, not just the use of the pottery itself, but in folk beliefs and
remedies connected to clay. What I saw in rural Romanians was a way of life
still deeply rooted in an attachment to the very soil of the country's  rugged,
forested mountains and flat plains.

CHAPTER 3A - Arcade Pascaniuc: The last traditionalist

Most mornings, Arcade Pascaniuc's days begin as they have for the last 69
years, since he was seven years old, by keeping an 8,000-year tradition alive
with his bare feet.

In the back of his modest cottage in the remote northern Moldavian village of
Marginea, he kneads clay with his feet until it is soft enough to be
transferred to his potter's wheel. There, I watched him fashion it into pots,
pitchers and cups. He works alone, and unless you stumbled across the small,
rusted sign advertising his shop on the narrow lane where he lives, you would
never know he was in business.

"The pots I make,” he tells me proudly as he works,  "are for people to make
use of in their homes, and not to set by their windows.”

CHAPTER 3B

With his aged and gnarled hands he skillfully shapes a pot before my
eyes. His pottery is unadorned. No painting, no colors, purely functional.
Everything has a practical purpose. As he speaks softly while working, it's
clear that to him this is the measure of something that will last.

"It's been going on for a long time,” he says. "People used to eat from clay
vessels before iron was known. I don't really know all the history behind it,
but it's an old tradition, and I want to keep it as I learned it. I am working
in the same way I used to 50 years ago.”

He first learned the art of pottery from his father, who learned it from his
and on and on.

"For many generations my forefathers used to make pots,” he says.

Each passed down both the necessary skills and the essential shapes he makes in
his humble workshop. As I watch, he makes it look easy, but it clearly takes
great skill to work the clay into the right shape, to shape a pot so it will be
sturdy, appealing and useful, and to be fired in his backyard kiln so the pots
bake without shattering.

CHAPTER 3C

It's a cloudy summer day as Pascaniuc demonstrates age-old
techniques, passed down for generations, that allow him to make the
time-honored designs Romanians still find useful in everyday life.

"Now I'm making a pot we call ‘Old Lady,'” he explains, quickly shaping a block
of clay, all the while spinning the potter's wheel with his bare feet.  He
raises the sides and widens the opening with movements so practiced they seem
nearly unconscious.

"People bake cozonac (a traditional Romanian cake) on it.” The design, he
explains, bakes very hot in the middle and creates a cavity in the cake. "When
it comes out of the oven, it has a hole in it, and you can put (painted) eggs
in it and bring it to church for Easter blessings.”

Pascaniuc works alone and lives modestly with his wife in their cottage
surrounded by vegetable fields and a small grove of fruit trees. Through both
his dedication to his craft and in his determination to see that it remains a
part of everyday life, he is the embodiment of a knowledge keeper.

"I've known this clay for 76 years,” he says, again with evident pride.
"People still buy these pots.”

CHAPTER 3D – FULL SCREEN VIDEO -  Arcade Pascaniuc

CHAPTER 4A - Georghe Magopat: Maker and Merchant

Keeping knowledge alive for knowledge's sake is noble, but for traditional
skills to survive, they have to make sense on a practical level. They have to
provide a living for those who practice them. Gheorghe Magopat and his family
have found one way to make that happen.

He too works in Marginea, not too far from Pascaniuc. Once it was a thriving
center of pottery, a legacy apparent at the town's entrance where the huge
sculpture of a black pitcher welcomes you. Today only two workshops survive.
But while Pascaniuc works in the back of his house on a quiet lane, Magopat's
establishment sits on a well-traveled main road, with large signs and a
billowing banner advertising its presence.

CHAPTER 4B

Tour buses packed with foreign tourists arrive frequently to see
him, his son, son-in-law and two additional workers fashioning pots in his
long, well-lighted workshop. Along lengthy wooden shelves, multiple copies of
pots and vases await a move to the kiln out back. Afterward, I follow visitors
drifting to not one, but two, gift shops displaying ceramics of all kinds, both
traditional and more varied in style. The latter are garishly decorated,
desperately trying to captivate tourists' eyes and pocketbooks.

Magopat's willingness to adapt to the demands of today's marketplace allows his
shop to support an extended family, but it also provides him the opportunity to
keep alive a unique ‘black' pottery tradition.

"Black ceramics from our town dates back around 300 to 350 years,” he tells me,
explaining it was first created by accident, a story he clearly enjoys telling.
It happened when a potter's earthen kiln collapsed after a heavy rain. The
potter thought everything was ruined, but when he began building a new kiln on
the spot, he discovered pots that had turned a glossy coal black.

CHAPTER 4C

"There was some wood left in the oven, which continued to burn after
the earth fell over the pots. However, there was baking without oxygen, so a
lot of smoke came out, and the burning hot pots immediately absorbed it,”
Magopat recounts. "Potters from Marginea have been making black ceramics from
that moment on.”

Much like Pascaniuc, Magopat's large workshop shop makes traditional pottery
many Romanians use regularly. The most popular is a covered clay casserole dish
used to cook "sarmale” or meat-stuffed cabbage rolls.

"There are two types of objects which have been the same since always,” he
stresses, "the sarmale and milk pots.”  Packed in boxes printed with a message
reminding buyers that their shape is two millennia-old, the sarmale pots remain
among his most popular items. They sell especially well during the holiday
seasons when families gather to celebrate.

His family has been making pottery now for five generations, and he hopes his
grandson will be able to continue the tradition. "Unfortunately, out of 50-60
families that were practicing black pottery when I was a kid, there are only
two left today,” he says. "I don't want to show a lack of modesty, but I have
worked hard and done my best so that this craft should not disappear.”

CHAPTER 4D – FULL SCREEN VIDEO -  Georghe Magopat

CHAPTER 5A - Nicolae Moldovan: The old inspires the new

The older, nondescript one-story recycled building where Nicolae Moldovan keeps
his studio stands in the shadow of a mammoth Communist-era apartment block in
Bucharest. It's somehow an appropriate setting.  In Moldovan's work, the
prehistoric and the modern co-exist in a way that brings new life to both.

He tells me of his devotion to the Cucuteni method of making pots. Like those
ancient potters, he doesn't even use a potter's wheel, fashioning each piece
solely by hand.

"I have been captivated by the Cucuteni culture and the technique that was used
to make this kind of pottery back in Neolithic times, since I was a student,”
he says. "Feeling the clay in your hands is very important; this is what I
enjoyed the most about it.”

CHAPTER 5B

When students come to his studio, they start with a lesson in
Romanian history and identity. "First I tell them a lot of the essential
aspects of the Cucuteni tradition, the ABCs of this ancient culture.” He
explains "how it all started, and the fact that compared to us, people in those
times had a closer relationship with the earth, the air and the water, the
primary elements.”

But Moldovan doesn't simply make pottery in an ancient tradition; he also uses
that tradition as an inspiration for strikingly modern pottery and sculptures.
He fuses metal, often sharp spikes or nails, with traditional forms to create
works of art that play off the contrasts between the materials. In addition, he
creates large sculptures of the chisels and other tools used by Neolithic
potters. It's a way of celebrating what Moldovan sees as a fundamental
connection between Romanians and clay.

"It is very interesting that even nowadays people build houses made of wood and
clay,” he says. "This is a strong relationship between our part of the world
and those two materials.”

His work is also an effort to preserve techniques that led to pottery of
enduring beauty. "I think it is essential for people to learn how to mold and
paint in this way because the objects created 5,000-6,000 years BC were
outstanding,” Moldovan says.

"Such vessels live on and can, without doubt, be exhibited in any museum in the
world and at any level. These objects will last forever.”

CHAPTER 5C – FULL SCREEN VIDEO -  Nicolae Moldovan

CHAPTER 6A - Ion Ghinoiu: Mapping a nation's soul

In a small, 4th-floor, walk-up office in a late nineteenth century mansion that
looks as though it last got a fresh coat of paint during the Communist era, Ion
Ghinoiu has been quietly toiling away for more than 45 years on what could be
considered a map of Romanian identity.

Ghinoiu is one of several scholars toiling on a massive five-volume
Ethnographic Atlas of Romania, an almost unbelievably comprehensive look at
enduring customs and folklore of his native country. The atlases include maps
recording the evolution of local traditions, beliefs and practices. To collect
the information starting in the 1970s, Ghinoiu and numerous colleagues
interviewed 18,000 rural Romanians in 536 villages across the country.

CHAPTER 6B

Having spent so many years bent over the records he and his
colleagues compiled, Ghinoiu's eyesight is nearly gone. He has to hold pages
within inches of his eyes to bring them into focus. Still, decades of
painstaking research have helped him to see Romanian history and culture as
clearly as anyone.

"Clay appears throughout these volumes of the Atlas,” Ghinoiu explains to me,
his hand resting on the thick volumes.

Born of a peasant family in a small Wallachian village, Ghinoiu recounts a
childhood memory of an annual tradition known as Old Men of Summer, when people
gave away pots filled with water or food as a tribute to the departed. In such
practices, he believes, a spiritual Romanian connection to clay endures in
countless ways.

"Even today, there is a belief that if a dying person is laid on clay, his
passing to the other world will be easier,” he adds. "Also, women used to give
birth on clay floors, or placed clay on their womb to make it easier. During
their pregnancy they would often chew some small pieces of baked clay to ease
the pain.”

CHAPTER 6C

As we talk, Ghinoiu tells me about the universality of symbols on
the early pottery. The spiral of life leading into eternity is widespread, as
are other geometric forms. One sees it repeated throughout much of the
prehistoric world. In such ways he sees connections with other cultures in the
region and beyond.

In fact, he believes the earliest Romanians played a formative role on the
European continent. If so, the knowledge he has kept alive through his research
goes beyond Romania to provide Europe with a sense of its own roots.

"Here we have the civilization on the Danube going back millennia before the
wider development of the ancient Greco-Roman one,” he says of the influence of
the earliest clay cultures. "This is the European identity.”

CHAPTER 6D – FULL SCREEN VIDEO -  Ion Ghinoiu

CHAPTER 7A - George Trohari: Collector of the past

In Bucharest, Romania's capital, I was introduced to George Trohari, already
retired for five years from a 30-year career as an archeologist with the
National Museum of Romania, an elegant columned neoclassical building in the
old and recently revitalized old city center.

Every working day he still returns to the museum for a few hours. Regularly, he
hikes down a long hallway in the rear of the building, up a balky elevator, to
a dimly lit, cavernous room. Here, his dedication becomes clear. On wooden
shelves are rows upon rows of priceless artifacts from the past. Clay pottery
from a variety of ancient cultures, including Cucuteni and Dacian, spans more
than 8,000 years of history. As I survey the scene, I'm stunned by countless
shelves of world-class Neolithic pottery, much more than can be displayed.

To the scholars who work in the museum, the shelves are a living timeline of
Romanian and early European civilization. I'm amazed at how practical many of
the pieces are. They may be ancient, but they remain starkly contemporary in
utility.

CHAPTER 7B

There's an ingenious small clay cooking stove with two small pots
designed to be fitted to burner openings on the top. Another catches my
attention, a strangely fashioned pitcher that still feels alive with the
imagination of its creator; and a lidded storage vessel that would be useful in
any kitchen nowadays.

I'm astounded to discover that some of the oldest pots may even have led to the
earliest smelting of metal. This would mean that pottery-making played a
central in the opening the door to the iron-age. This science-based theory is
based on the high degree of metallic elements in the clay, which would melted
into formable material.

CHAPTER 7C

Trohari shows me several pieces from the museum's priceless trove to
further my understanding of both Romania's past and its present. During his
career, he has spent many weeks on archeological digs, where he made it a point
of patiently sharing the history of the excavated pottery with local villagers.
Often he saw a living connection in clay between past and present Romanian
generations in ancestral objects still on the shelves in the homes of people he
visited.

His favorite piece in the museum's collection is a 2,000-year-old Dacian vase
that he discovered shattered, His wife, a ceramics restorer, lovingly put it
back together. The vase, in effect, became a work of both his family's and an
anonymous ancient potter, symbolizing the bond that binds many to their clay
culture origins.

Even after all these years, Trohari explains to me, as he picks up the ancient
pot: "The heart beats faster. I immediately think of the smell the clay and I
smell the time of he Geato-Dacians.  It's a historic air and a history which
continues today.”

CHAPTER 7D – FULL SCREEN VIDEO -  George Trohari

CHAPTER 8A - Romeo Dumitrescu: A 'lightning' spark

There was a final insight I needed. The record of ancient knowledge is much
like pottery itself. Over time, it can become broken, scattered, lost. To
understand and appreciate it, we need individuals willing to seek out ancient
pieces of the past and to see that they are saved for later generations. The
more that are unearthed from the past, the greater the knowledge we carry with
us into the future.

This is how I found and met Romeo Dumitrescu, a doctor and successful
businessman in Bucharest. He is an exceptional collector of Cucuteni pottery.
At one time a collector of paintings, he came across his first piece of
7,000-year-old Cucuteni pottery and found his true passion.

"The first time I saw Cucuteni vases was only 14 years ago,” Dumitrescu
recounted to me when me met in a large turn-of-the-century mansion restored
into the City of Bucharest's official museum.

"It was a lightning bolt.”

CHAPTER 8B

That lightning bolt would propel him on a mission to gather as many
pieces of the pottery as possible. Soon after he ended-up purchasing one of the
largest Cucuteni sites, which had never been properly or fully explored, and
hiring archaeologists and students to expand the dig under the direction of the
Romanian Ministry of Culture. He created his own museum to display what he has
collected and shared the collection with the City of Iasi in Moldavia.

It was an expensive and lengthy project, stretching over twelve years. But what
Dumitrescu's determination brought to light now enriches the world. More than
6,000 Cucuteni pieces were discovered on his site and many restored. It is a
vast collection illustrating connections between far-flung civilizations and
reoccurring motifs inspired by the earliest moments of human artistic
consciousness.

CHAPTER 8C

On this particular summer afternoon in Bucharest, Dumitrescu,
elegantly dressed in a French suit, lingered over favorite pieces of his
collection on exhibit at the city's museum. He described the still vibrant
painted figures on funerary vases – snakes and wolves, goats and deer,
creatures that clearly held spiritual meaning for Neolithic culture – and he
pointed out the familiar and ubiquitous white spiral of life, "a symbol that is
seen always, everywhere around the world.” He also pointed to designs that show
up in later Persian pottery, possible evidence of the interconnectedness
between the earliest human civilizations.

Thanks to Dumitrescu's passion for clay pottery -especially Cucuteni -
thousands of people can contemplate the enduring power and mystery of this
ancient work. It's knowledge keeping as an act of public generosity, yet with
an emotional cost.

"I see these same pieces in catalogues of various exhibits,” he mentions
nostalgically. "It touches my heart. But I miss them. It's like someone in the
family who is no longer at home.”

CHAPTER 8D – FULL SCREEN VIDEO -  Romeo Dumitrescu

CHAPTER 9A - Clay of the past – and tomorrow

The virtue of enduring forms is that they reconnect us to the idea of
permanence in an ever-evolving world.

As the pace of change accelerates and as Romania and the rest of the globe
plunge headlong into the future, the knowledge kept alive by keepers such as
Pascaniuc, Magopat, Moldovan, Ghinoiu, Trohari and Dumitrescu serve as a
touchstone that reminds us where we came from and lets us see more clearly who
we are. They help us to understand what we need to hold on to as we move
forward. The lesson can be found in the simplest things.

"You see here, for example, a cup from Dacian times,” says Trohari, lifting a
priceless piece of pottery. "It is a form that has lasted until today.” Sitting
beside the ancient ceramics in the National History Museum's collection,
Trohari continues, you see that "the decorations change . . . At the same time,
the form stays almost the same until now.”

The knowledge embodied in these works also gives us an idea of what we share
with others. Ghinoiu and Trohari have both studied how symbology, decorative
motifs and particular forms that appear in ancient Romanian clay work appear
too in surrounding cultures from northern European to early Greek and Persian.

"We have influenced others. Others have influenced us,” says Trohari as we end
our conversation. "There are combined forms and decoration that are shared
universally.”

The knowledge these scholars, potters and collectors are quietly keeping alive
is part of a larger heritage, one that recognizes the shared origins of human
society, knowledge that, more than ever, remains a vital building block of our
future. One that enters our daily life every time we touch a porcelain plate,
bowl or pot.

CHAPTER 10A - CREDITS
